Added guide for packaging .NET apps (#408)
flatpak/flatpak-docs: docs/dotnet.rst

Dotnet
======

Prerequisites
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- The application is built with a Linux-compatible .NET desktop application framework such as:
    - `Avalonia UI <https://avaloniaui.net/>`__
    - `Uno Platform <https://platform.uno/>`__
    - `Eto <https://github.com/picoe/Eto>`__
    - `GTKSharp <https://github.com/GtkSharp/GtkSharp>`__
- The application's source code is hosted on a Git server such as GitHub, GitLab, or Bitbucket
- A Git commit with a `Tag <https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Basics-Tagging>`__ exists on the repository to use for the build. This usually represents the version number of the application (e.g. v1.0, v1.1, etc.).

Steps for Packaging
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Installing dependencies
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

1. Install Flatpak using the method provided for your distribution

>    `Flatpak - Quick Setup <https://flatpak.org/setup/>`__

Author: Just updated!

> 2. Install Flatpak Builder as both a flatpak package and a distribution package (apt / dnf)

Author: Good point! I've removed it from the guide.

.. code-block:: shell

  flatpak install org.flatpak.Builder
  sudo apt install flatpak-builder

Creating the Flatpak
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> .. note::

Author: Just updated! The placeholders have had the note syntax removed.

  Here is a brief description of the placeholders in the below example:

>   - ``<app-id>``: The name of your Flatpak, see `"Conventions - Application IDs" section <https://docs.flatpak.org/en/latest/conventions.html#application-ids>`__.

Author: Just updated!

  - ``<app-name>``: The name of the root folder of your app repository
  - ``<project-name>``: The name of your ``.csproj`` file

>   - ``<git-server-url>``: The URL to your git server (e.g. ``https://github.com/``, ``https://gitlab.com``)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - ``<git-url>``: The URL to the git repository of the project
```

>   - ``<user-name>``: The username you use in your Git server (GitHub, GitLab, Bitbucket)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>   - ``<release-number>``: The numbered release to build from, in the form of a Git `Tag <https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Basics-Tagging>`__.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - ``<release-number>``: The numbered release to build from, in the form of a Git `tag <https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Basics-Tagging>`_.
```

3.  Create a new folder somewhere different from your existing project

4.  Create a YAML file titled ``<app-id>.yaml`` with the following example template, replacing the placeholders with the appropriate information. (Note: If your project file lives in a subfolder, be sure to include that in the build paths in this file and subsequent commands as well.): 

.. code-block:: yaml

>   app-id: <app-id>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  id: <app-id>
```

  runtime: org.freedesktop.Platform
  runtime-version: '23.08'
  sdk: org.freedesktop.Sdk
  sdk-extensions:
    - org.freedesktop.Sdk.Extension.dotnet8
  build-options:
    prepend-path: "/usr/lib/sdk/dotnet8/bin"
    append-ld-library-path: "/usr/lib/sdk/dotnet8/lib"

>     prepend-pkg-config-path: "/app/lib/pkgconfig:/app/share/pkgconfig:/usr/lib/pkgconfig:/usr/share/pkgconfig:/usr/lib/sdk/dotnet8/lib/pkgconfig"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    prepend-pkg-config-path: "/usr/lib/sdk/dotnet8/lib/pkgconfig"
```

  command: <project-name>

  finish-args:
    - --device=dri
    # TODO: Replace this with wayland and fallback-x11 once Wayland support
    #       becomes available:
    #       https://github.com/AvaloniaUI/Avalonia/pull/8003
    - --socket=x11
    - --share=ipc
    - --env=DOTNET_ROOT=/app/lib/dotnet

  modules:
    - name: dotnet
      buildsystem: simple
      build-commands:
      - /usr/lib/sdk/dotnet8/bin/install.sh

>     - name: <app-id>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - name: <app-name>
```

      buildsystem: simple
      sources:
        - type: git

>           url: <git-server-url>/<user-name>/<project-name>.git

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          url: <git-url>
```

>           tag: <release-number>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          tag: <git-tag>
```

        - ./nuget-sources.json
      build-commands:
        - dotnet publish <project-name>.csproj -c Release --no-self-contained --source ./nuget-sources
        - mkdir -p ${FLATPAK_DEST}/bin
        - cp -r /bin/Release/net8.0/publish/* ${FLATPAK_DEST}/bin

.. note::

    For providing access to other things such as the network or

>     filesystem, see the `“Sandbox Permissions” section <https://docs.flatpak.org/en/latest/sandbox-permissions.html>`__

Reviewer: Use :doc:sandbox-permissions, surround sandbox-permissions with backticks on front and back.

Dotnet
======

Prerequisites
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- The application is built with a Linux-compatible .NET desktop application framework such as:
    - `Avalonia UI <https://avaloniaui.net/>`_
    - `Uno Platform <https://platform.uno/>`_
    - `Eto <https://github.com/picoe/Eto>`_
    - `GTKSharp <https://github.com/GtkSharp/GtkSharp>`_

> - The application's source code is hosted on a Git server such as GitHub, GitLab, or Bitbucket
> - A Git commit with a `tag <https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Basics-Tagging>`_ exists on the repository to use for the build. This usually represents the version number of the application (e.g. v1.0, v1.1, etc.).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

You can remove this two, it doesn't have to have a tag and be hosted somewhere. Local sources and commits work too.

Reviewer: Can you also add going through the "Building your first Flatpak" as a prereq ? https://docs.flatpak.org/en/latest/first-build.html

Author: Perhaps including tagging is a bit superfluous for a first-time tutorial, so I've just removed it!

However, I've kept the remote git repository as a pre-requisite, since it's just a pre-requisite for this guide. I did attempt and succeed at locally packaging using a local git repo, but the additional steps required to set up the directory tree did make things a bit harder to follow.

Steps for Packaging
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Installing dependencies
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: I've updated this title to be a bit more descriptive, rather than removing it. This helps with the sidebar navigation a bit, since it starts on step 1.

      buildsystem: simple
      build-commands:
      - /usr/lib/sdk/dotnet8/bin/install.sh

    - name: <app-name>
      buildsystem: simple
      sources:
        - type: git
          url: <git-url>
          tag: <git-tag>
        - ./nuget-sources.json
      build-commands:
        - dotnet publish <project-name>.csproj -c Release --no-self-contained --source ./nuget-sources
        - mkdir -p ${FLATPAK_DEST}/bin
        - cp -r bin/Release/net8.0/publish/* ${FLATPAK_DEST}/bin

.. note::

    For providing access to other things such as the network or
    filesystem, see :doc:`sandbox-permissions`

5.  Copy and save the dotnet NuGet sources generator script
    ``flatpak-dotnet-generator.py`` from the `Flatpak Builder Tools
    repository <https://github.com/flatpak/flatpak-builder-tools>`_, to
    the current folder, or run the following command to download it:

.. code-block:: shell

      wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/flatpak/flatpak-builder-tools/master/dotnet/flatpak-dotnet-generator.py

6.  Clone down your project repository to the folder

.. code-block:: shell

      git clone <git-url>

7.  Install dependencies from Flathub

.. code-block:: shell

>       flatpak-builder build-dir --user --repo=repo --install-deps-from=flathub <app-id>.yaml

Reviewer: This should be step 8

>       flatpak-builder build-dir --user --repo=repo --install-deps-from=flathub <app-id>.yaml

Reviewer: Delete this, step 9 already install deps

Author: The reason I kept this part in there is that the dependencies are required for the `flatpak-dotnet-generator.py` Python script on step 8 (which generates the `nuget-sources.json` file) as it executes a shell command for `dotnet restore` in the context of a Flatpak.

```python
subprocess.run([
    'flatpak', 'run',
    '--env=DOTNET_CLI_TELEMETRY_OPTOUT=true',
    '--env=DOTNET_SKIP_FIRST_TIME_EXPERIENCE=true',
    '--command=sh', f'--runtime=org.freedesktop.Sdk//{args.freedesktop}', '--share=network',
    '--filesystem=host', f'org.freedesktop.Sdk.Extension.dotnet{args.dotnet}//{args.freedesktop}', '-c',
    f'PATH="${{PATH}}:/usr/lib/sdk/dotnet{args.dotnet}/bin" LD_LIBRARY_PATH="$LD_LIBRARY_PATH:/usr/lib/sdk/dotnet{args.dotnet}/lib" exec dotnet restore "$@"',
    '--', '--packages', tmp, args.project] + runtime_args)
```

Reviewer: Ah ok. Then remove the `repo` argument and use `--download-only` otherwise this will start building

Author: Just updated!

> 8.  Run the NuGet source config generator script ``flatpak-dotnet-generator.py`` with the following arguments:

Reviewer: This should be step 7

.. code-block:: shell

      python3 flatpak-dotnet-generator.py --dotnet 8 --freedesktop 23.08 nuget-sources.json <app-name>/<project-name>.csproj

> 9. Run the Flatpak Builder script to build and install the local Flatpak

Reviewer: ```suggestion
9. Build and install using Flatpak builder
```

Author: Just added!

.. code-block:: shell

>       flatpak-builder build-dir --user --force-clean --install --repo=repo <app-id>.yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      flatpak-builder build-dir --user --force-clean --install --repo=repo --install-deps-from=flathub <app-id>.yaml
```

Author: (This one may be redundant if the changes referenced in comment [here](https://github.com/flatpak/flatpak-docs/pull/408#discussion_r1689040817) should stay as it is)

Reviewer: OK

  - The application uses .NET 7.
    (It still should be applicable for other versions by modifying the version number)

Installing dependencies
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

1. Install Flatpak using the method provided for your distribution
   `Flatpak - Quick Setup <https://flatpak.org/setup/>`__
2. Install the FreeDesktop SDKs (When prompted for a version, select the
   latest available version)

  .. code-block:: shell

        flatpak install flathub org.freedesktop.Platform org.freedesktop.Sdk

3. Install the Flatpak SDK extension for your dotnet version
   (e.g. `dotnet6 <https://github.com/flathub/org.freedesktop.Sdk.Extension.dotnet6>`__, `dotnet7 <https://github.com/flathub/org.freedesktop.Sdk.Extension.dotnet7>`__)

  .. code-block:: shell

        flatpak install org.freedesktop.Sdk.Extension.dotnet7

Creating the Flatpak
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

5.  Create a new folder somewhere different from your existing project

6.  Create a YAML file titled
    ``com.github.[[username]].[[project-name]].yaml`` with the following
    example template, replacing the placeholders with the appropriate
    information: \

  .. code-block:: yaml

>       app-id: com.github.[[username]].[[project-name]]

Reviewer 2: it's `io.github`. always.

Author: I've updated the guide to reference https://docs.flatpak.org/en/latest/conventions.html#application-ids, since that has the bulk of the information users would need to know to determine what the ID should be.

      runtime: org.freedesktop.Platform
      runtime-version: '22.08'
      sdk: org.freedesktop.Sdk
      sdk-extensions:
        - org.freedesktop.Sdk.Extension.dotnet7
      build-options:
        prepend-path: "/usr/lib/sdk/dotnet7/bin"
        append-ld-library-path: "/usr/lib/sdk/dotnet7/lib"
        env:
          PKG_CONFIG_PATH: "/app/lib/pkgconfig:/app/share/pkgconfig:/usr/lib/pkgconfig:/usr/share/pkgconfig:/usr/lib/sdk/dotnet7/lib/pkgconfig"

      command: [[project-name]]

      finish-args:
        - --device=dri
        # TODO: Replace this with wayland and fallback-x11 once Wayland support
        #       becomes available:
        #       https://github.com/AvaloniaUI/Avalonia/pull/8003
        - --socket=x11
        - --env=DOTNET_ROOT=/app/lib/dotnet

      modules:
        - name: dotnet
          buildsystem: simple
          build-commands:
          - /usr/lib/sdk/dotnet7/bin/install.sh

        - name: [[project-name]]
          buildsystem: simple
          sources:
            - type: git

>               url: https://github.com/[[username]]/[[project-name]].git

Reviewer 2: a commit or a tag is needed

Author: I've added the "tag" YAML attribute to the example, as well as some additional reference information about Tags

Dotnet
======

Prerequisites
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
  - The application is built with a Linux-compatible .NET desktop application framework compatible such as `GTKSharp <https://github.com/GtkSharp/GtkSharp>`__, `Avalonia UI <https://www.avaloniaui.net/>`__, or `Eto <https://github.com/picoe/Eto>`__
  - The application's source code is hosted on a Git server such as GitHub, GitLab, or Bitbucket
  - A Git commit with a `Tag <https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Basics-Tagging>`__ exists on the repository to use for the build. This usually represents the version number of the application (e.g. v1.0, v1.1, etc.).

Steps for Packaging
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Installing dependencies

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer: This whole part can be simplified with `--install-deps-from=flathub`

Author: Updated the "Creating the Flatpak" section to include this argument, and also removed a few steps from the "Installing Dependencies" section.

   `Flatpak - Quick Setup <https://flatpak.org/setup/>`__

2. Install Flatpak Builder as both a flatpak package and a distribution package (apt / dnf)

  .. code-block:: shell

        flatpak install org.flatpak.Builder
        sudo apt install flatpak-builder

3. Install the FreeDesktop SDKs (When prompted for a version, select the
   latest available version)

  .. code-block:: shell

        flatpak install flathub org.freedesktop.Platform org.freedesktop.Sdk

4. Install the Flatpak SDK extension for your dotnet version
   (e.g. `dotnet6 <https://github.com/flathub/org.freedesktop.Sdk.Extension.dotnet6>`__, `dotnet7 <https://github.com/flathub/org.freedesktop.Sdk.Extension.dotnet7>`__)

  .. code-block:: shell

        flatpak install org.freedesktop.Sdk.Extension.dotnet6

Creating the Flatpak
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. note::

  Here is a brief description of the placeholders in the below example:

  - ``<namespace>``: The prefix that goes before the name of your Flatpak, which uniquely identifies the author. See `"Conventions - Application IDs" section <https://docs.flatpak.org/en/latest/conventions.html#application-ids>`__ to find the appropriate value for your use case.

>   - ``<app-name>``: The name of your application to use for Flatpak, usually somewhat similar to the project name inside the solution

Reviewer: Unless there is some .NET convention, just use app ID or Flatpak ID. Introducing more terms is confusing. You link to the page noting the app ID rules.

Author: Just updated this as well, the ``<namespace>`` verbiage is now ``<app-id>``.

  - ``<project-name>``: The name of your ``.csproj`` file
  - ``<user-name>``: The username you use in your Git server (GitHub, GitLab, Bitbucket)
  - ``<release-number>``: The numbered release to build from, in the form of a Git `Tag <https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Basics-Tagging>`__.

5.  Create a new folder somewhere different from your existing project

6.  Create a YAML file titled
    ``<namespace>.<app-name>.yaml`` with the following
    example template, replacing the placeholders with the appropriate
    information: \

  .. code-block:: yaml

      app-id: <namespace>.<app-name>
      runtime: org.freedesktop.Platform
      runtime-version: '22.08'
      sdk: org.freedesktop.Sdk
      sdk-extensions:
        - org.freedesktop.Sdk.Extension.dotnet6
      build-options:
        prepend-path: "/usr/lib/sdk/dotnet6/bin"
        append-ld-library-path: "/usr/lib/sdk/dotnet6/lib"
        env:

>           PKG_CONFIG_PATH: "/app/lib/pkgconfig:/app/share/pkgconfig:/usr/lib/pkgconfig:/usr/share/pkgconfig:/usr/lib/sdk/dotnet6/lib/pkgconfig"

Reviewer 2: you should use `append-pkg-config-path` instead (or `prepend-pkg-config-path`)

Author: Just updated this one as well to `prepend-pkg-config-path`

      command: <project-name>

      finish-args:
        - --device=dri
        # TODO: Replace this with wayland and fallback-x11 once Wayland support
        #       becomes available:
        #       https://github.com/AvaloniaUI/Avalonia/pull/8003

>         - --socket=x11

Reviewer 2: `--share=ipc` is necessary too

Author: Added!

        - --env=DOTNET_ROOT=/app/lib/dotnet

      modules:
        - name: dotnet
          buildsystem: simple
          build-commands:
          - /usr/lib/sdk/dotnet6/bin/install.sh

        - name: <app-name>
          buildsystem: simple
          sources:
            - type: git
              url: https://github.com/<username>/<project-name>.git

>               tags: <release-number>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
              tag: <release-number>
```

            - ./nuget-sources.json
          build-commands:
            - dotnet publish <project-name>/<project-name>.csproj -c Release --no-self-contained --source ./nuget-sources
            - mkdir -p ${FLATPAK_DEST}/bin

>             - cp -r ${FLATPAK_BUILDER_BUILDDIR}/<project-name>/bin/Release/net6.0/publish/* ${FLATPAK_DEST}/bin

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            - cp -r <project-name>/bin/Release/net6.0/publish/* ${FLATPAK_DEST}/bin
```

it is in the right directory

  .. note::

      For providing access to other things such as the network or
      filesystem, see the `“Sandbox Permissions” section <https://docs.flatpak.org/en/latest/sandbox-permissions.html>`__

7.  Copy and save the dotnet NuGet sources generator script
    ``flatpak-dotnet-generator.py`` from the `Flatpak Builder Tools
    repository <https://github.com/flatpak/flatpak-builder-tools>`__, to
    the current folder, or run the following command to download it:

  .. code-block:: shell

        wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/flatpak/flatpak-builder-tools/master/dotnet/flatpak-dotnet-generator.py

8.  Clone down your project repository to the folder

  .. code-block:: shell

        git clone https://github.com/<username>/<app-name>.git

9.  Run the NuGet source config generator script ``flatpak-dotnet-generator.py`` with the following arguments:

  .. code-block:: shell

        python3 flatpak-dotnet-generator.py --dotnet 6 nuget-sources.json <app-name>/<project-name>/<project-name>.csproj

10. Run the Flatpak Builder script to build the local Flatpak

  .. code-block:: shell

>         flatpak-builder build-dir <namespace>.<app-name>.yaml --force-clean

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        flatpak-builder build-dir --install-deps-from=flathub --user --force-clean --install --repo=repo <manifest>
```

This will build, install and export in one command. You can drop the other ones below.

Author: Just added! Thanks for pointing that out.
